[Docs] ES|QL Data Federation (#146945)
elastic/elasticsearch: docs/reference/query-languages/esql/esql-data-federation-querying.md

| `_ignored` | null |
| `_index_mode`, `_tsid`, `_size` | null |

For example, this query returns file-level metadata for each matching row:

```esql
FROM access_logs METADATA _file.path, _file.name, _file.size
| KEEP _file.path, _file.name, _file.size, status_code
| LIMIT 10
```

## Full-text search

[`MATCH`](functions-operators/search-functions/match.md) can filter dataset rows by evaluating the query against values read from the files. This runtime search does not use an inverted index and does not contribute to `_score`. `_score` remains null for dataset rows.

Because there is no inverted index, `MATCH` on a dataset evaluates by scanning values row by row. For large datasets where full-text search is the primary access pattern, consider ingesting the data into {{es}} for indexed search performance.

[`MATCH_PHRASE`](functions-operators/search-functions/match_phrase.md) is not currently available for datasets.

## Limitations

The operations below require structures that only exist in an {{es}} index, such as the inverted index, doc values, or time series metadata. Each fails with a clear error rather than wrong results.

| Operation | Reason | Error |
|---|---|---|

> | LOOKUP JOIN, with a dataset as the lookup target | A dataset works as the left (source) side of the join. The lookup target must be an {{es}} index. | `LOOKUP JOIN against a dataset is not supported` |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `LOOKUP JOIN`, with a dataset as the lookup target | A dataset works as the left (source) side of the join. The lookup target must be an {{es}} index. | `LOOKUP JOIN against a dataset is not supported` |
```

> | TS (time series) | A time-series source must be an {{es}} index. | `TS command is not supported for datasets` |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `TS` (time series) | A time-series source must be an {{es}} index. | `TS command is not supported for datasets` |
```

> | LOGSDB and other non-standard index modes | These index modes apply only to {{es}} indices. | `LOGSDB index mode on FROM <dataset> is not supported` |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `LOGSDB` and other non-standard index modes | These index modes apply only to {{es}} indices. | `LOGSDB index mode on FROM <dataset> is not supported` |
```

> | MATCH_PHRASE | Runtime phrase search is not currently available for datasets. | `… cannot operate on [<field>], which is not a field from an index mapping` |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `MATCH_PHRASE` | Runtime phrase search is not currently available for datasets. | `… cannot operate on [<field>], which is not a field from an index mapping` |
```

> | KNN | KNN requires a vector field from an index mapping, which a dataset does not have. | `… cannot operate on [<field>], which is not a field from an index mapping` |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `KNN` | `KNN` requires a vector field from an index mapping, which a dataset does not have. | `… cannot operate on [<field>], which is not a field from an index mapping` |
```

> | KQL, QSTR | These query an {{es}} index. | `… cannot be used after [FROM <dataset>]` |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `KQL`, `QSTR` | These query an {{es}} index. | `… cannot be used after [FROM <dataset>]` |
```

### Column selection

Use [`KEEP`](/reference/query-languages/esql/commands/keep.md) or [`DROP`](/reference/query-languages/esql/commands/drop.md) to select only the columns your query needs. For Parquet files, column selection pushes down to the reader so that unrequested columns are never fetched from storage. For CSV and NDJSON, the full row is read but unrequested columns are discarded early.

In practice, this can make a significant difference. A filtered query over a Parquet dataset that selects three columns reads roughly a third of the bytes that the same query reads without column selection.

### Partition pruning

When a dataset's resource path uses Hive-style partitioning (for example, `year=2024/month=3/`), the engine detects partition keys automatically and promotes them to queryable columns. A `WHERE` condition on a partition column evaluates during file discovery, before any data is read. On a two-year monthly-partitioned dataset, `WHERE year = 2024 AND month = 3` skips 23 out of 24 partitions at zero I/O cost.

> For details on partition detection modes, refer to [dataset settings](esql-data-federation-datasets.md#common-settings).

Reviewer 2: Pruning silently suspends if the partition filter lands after `LIMIT`/`SORT`/`STATS` — worth flagging so a reordered pipeline doesn't quietly lose it.

```suggestion
Pruning applies when the partition filter comes before any `LIMIT`, `SORT`, or `STATS` in the query. If one of those commands sits between `FROM` and the `WHERE` on a partition column, pruning is silently skipped and every partition is read. Try to put partition filters first.

For details on partition detection modes, refer to [dataset settings](esql-data-federation-datasets.md#common-settings).
```

### Filter and limit pushdown

[`WHERE`](/reference/query-languages/esql/commands/where.md) conditions and [`LIMIT`](/reference/query-languages/esql/commands/limit.md) push down to the file scan. For Parquet files, the engine uses row-group statistics and page indexes to skip data that cannot match the filter. Only row groups whose statistics overlap the filter condition are read, and within those row groups, late materialization reads predicate columns first and materializes other columns only for rows that survive the filter.

> For CSV and NDJSON, every row must be read and parsed, but rows that fail the filter are discarded before further processing.

Reviewer 2: Reader-level filter pushdown is Parquet-only; CSV/NDJSON filter above the reader. Tightening the lead so it doesn't imply reader pushdown for text formats.

```suggestion
[`WHERE`](/reference/query-languages/esql/commands/where.md) conditions and [`LIMIT`](/reference/query-languages/esql/commands/limit.md) reduce how much data a query reads, but how far they push down depends on the format. For Parquet files, filters push down into the reader itself: the engine uses row-group statistics and page indexes to skip data that cannot match the filter. Only row groups whose statistics overlap the filter condition are read, and within those row groups, late materialization reads predicate columns first and materializes other columns only for rows that survive the filter.

For CSV and NDJSON, filters do not reach the reader: every row must be read and parsed, but rows that fail the filter are discarded before further processing.
```

```esql
FROM access_logs
| WHERE status_code >= 500
| KEEP @timestamp, status_code, request_path
| LIMIT 100
```

The general query performance advice in [optimize {{esql}} query performance](esql-query-performance.md) applies to datasets too. In particular, adding a `WHERE`, a `KEEP`, and a `LIMIT` are the three most effective ways to reduce how much data a query reads from storage.

### Caching

> {{es}} caches file metadata (schemas and file listings) so that repeated queries against the same dataset do not re-discover files each time. Cache TTLs are configurable through [cluster settings](esql-data-federation-cluster-settings.md). The default schema cache TTL is 5 minutes and the default listing cache TTL is 30 seconds.

Reviewer 2: There's no schema-cache TTL — `esql.source.cache.schema.ttl` is a deprecated no-op. Schemas invalidate when files change; only the listing cache has a 30s TTL.

```suggestion
{{es}} caches file metadata (schemas and file listings) so that repeated queries against the same dataset do not re-discover files each time. Cached schemas are invalidated when the underlying files change, so a schema stays cached for as long as it stays correct. There is no schema TTL. Only the file-listing cache uses a TTL (30 seconds by default) configurable through [cluster settings](esql-data-federation-cluster-settings.md).
```

### File discovery limits

A dataset's resource path can use glob patterns to match many files. Two cluster settings bound file discovery:

- `esql.external.max_discovered_files` (default 10,000): the maximum number of files a single dataset can resolve to.

> - `esql.external.max_glob_expansion` (default 100): the maximum number of glob expansions per query.

Reviewer 2: `max_glob_expansion` caps brace expansion and falls back to listing — it isn't "glob expansions per query" and doesn't abort (only `max_discovered_files` aborts).

```suggestion
- `esql.external.max_glob_expansion` (default 100): the maximum number of concrete paths a brace pattern (`{a,b,c}`) expands to. Past this cap, the engine falls back to listing the storage instead of failing.
```

If your dataset exceeds these limits, narrow the resource path or adjust the settings. Refer to [cluster settings](esql-data-federation-cluster-settings.md) for details.

## Query across datasets and indices

> Datasets share the same namespace as indices, aliases, and [{{esql}} views](esql-views.md), so `FROM` resolves each name independently. You can query a dataset and an index together in a single `FROM`:

Reviewer 2: Add data streams to the namespace list.

```suggestion
Datasets share the same namespace as indices, data streams, aliases, and [{{esql}} views](esql-views.md), so `FROM` resolves each name independently.
```

```esql
FROM speedtest_data, network_incidents METADATA _index
| KEEP _index, category, severity, avg_d_kbps, avg_lat_ms
| LIMIT 10
```

When sources have different schemas, columns that do not exist in a given source return `null` for rows from that source. Use `METADATA _index` to see which source each row came from. The `_index` column returns the dataset name for dataset rows and the index name for index rows.

## Use metadata columns

[Metadata columns](/reference/query-languages/esql/esql-metadata-fields.md) are available using the `METADATA` directive:

| Column | Returned for a dataset |
|---|---|
| `_index` | The dataset name. |
| `_id` | A stable per-row identifier. |

> | `_version` | The source file's modification time. |

Reviewer 2: `_version` is a raw epoch-millis `long`, not a datetime.

```suggestion
| `_version` | The source file's modification time as a `long` in epoch milliseconds, or null when storage reports no modification time. |
```

| `_source` | The row as a JSON object. |
| `_file.path`, `_file.name`, `_file.directory`, `_file.size`, `_file.modified` | The object each row was read from. |
| `_score` | null |
| `_ignored` | null |
| `_index_mode`, `_tsid`, `_size` | null |

For example, this query returns file-level metadata for each matching row:

```esql
FROM access_logs METADATA _file.path, _file.name, _file.size
| KEEP _file.path, _file.name, _file.size, status_code
| LIMIT 10
```

## Use search functions

[Search functions](/reference/query-languages/esql/functions-operators/search-functions.md) can filter dataset rows by evaluating the query against values read from the files. This runtime search does not use an inverted index and does not contribute to `_score`. `_score` remains null for dataset rows.

> Because there is no inverted index, search functions on a dataset evaluate by scanning values row by row. For large datasets where search is the primary access pattern, consider ingesting the data into {{es}} for indexed search performance.

Reviewer 2: A few real constraints on runtime `MATCH` worth stating.

```suggestion
Because there is no inverted index, search functions on a dataset evaluate by scanning values row by row. For large datasets where search is the primary access pattern, consider ingesting the data into {{es}} for indexed search performance.

Runtime `MATCH` on a dataset does not accept function options, requires the query value's type to match the field's type, and analyzes text with a fixed standard analyzer.
```

The following search functions are available for datasets:

| Function | Stack | Serverless |
|---|---|---|
| [`MATCH`](functions-operators/search-functions/match.md) | {applies_to}`stack: preview 9.5` | {applies_to}`serverless: preview` |
| [`MATCH_PHRASE`](functions-operators/search-functions/match_phrase.md) | {applies_to}`stack: preview 9.6` | {applies_to}`serverless: preview` |
| `_score` for dataset rows | Not yet available | Not yet available |

:::{tip}
New search functions are available on {{serverless-short}} first.
:::

> ## Limitations

Reviewer 2: For the error strings in this table: the `LOOKUP JOIN` and `TS` messages append `; dataset(s) requested: [...]`; the `KNN`/search message appends ` (the source is a federated data source, not an index)`; and the remote-datasets message reads `ES|QL queries with remote datasets are not supported. Matched [...]` (the cross-cluster row). Minor, but worth matching the exact text.

Author: https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/commit/c9435b85e10c12b2d396d65b65341207dfc1972b

The operations below require structures that only exist in an {{es}} index, such as the inverted index, doc values, or time series metadata. Each fails with a clear error rather than wrong results.

| Operation | Reason | Error |
|---|---|---|
| `LOOKUP JOIN`, with a dataset as the lookup target | A dataset works as the left (source) side of the join. The lookup target must be an {{es}} index. | `LOOKUP JOIN against a dataset is not supported` |
| `TS` (time series) | A time-series source must be an {{es}} index. | `TS command is not supported for datasets` |

> | Search functions | Not all search functions are available immediately on all deployment types. Refer to the [availability table](#search-functions). | `… cannot operate on [<field>], which is not a field from an index mapping` |

Reviewer 2: `MATCH` actually works at 9.5 (runtime scan) — this row reads as if it fails. Reframing to "not-yet-available functions", and the anchor should be `#use-search-functions`.

```suggestion
| Some search functions | `MATCH` works against datasets by scanning values at query time. Other search functions, such as `MATCH_PHRASE`, are not yet available on all versions and deployment types. Refer to the [availability table](#use-search-functions). | `… cannot operate on [<field>], which is not a field from an index mapping (the source is a federated data source, not an index)` |
```

Author: https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/commit/c9435b85e10c12b2d396d65b65341207dfc1972b reworded to be a bit clearer and more positively, but also future proof: the availability table should be the source of truth

> | `KNN` | `KNN` requires a vector field from an index mapping, which a dataset does not have. | `… cannot operate on [<field>], which is not a field from an index mapping` |

Reviewer 2: Two more enforced limits: the 8-branch-per-FROM cap, and the cross-source type-conflict error.

```suggestion
| `KNN` | `KNN` requires a vector field from an index mapping, which a dataset does not have. | `… cannot operate on [<field>], which is not a field from an index mapping` |
| More than 8 sources resolved in one `FROM` | A `FROM` that includes datasets runs one execution branch per resolved source, up to a limit of 8 branches. Query fewer sources together. | |
| A column with conflicting types across sources | When you query a dataset together with other sources and the same column has types that cannot be reconciled, the query fails rather than returning mixed types. | `Column [<name>] has conflicting data types in subqueries` |
```

> | Document-level security (DLS) and field-level security (FLS) | A dataset's `read` grant cannot carry document- or field-level security. Queries where DLS or FLS applies to a dataset are rejected during authorization. | `Datasets with document or field level security restrictions are not supported` |

Reviewer 2: The check also covers views, and the error names the remedy.

```suggestion
| Document-level security (DLS) and field-level security (FLS) | A dataset's `read` grant cannot carry document- or field-level security. Queries where DLS or FLS applies to a dataset are rejected during authorization. The same check covers [{{esql}} views](esql-views.md). The error tells you to remove the DLS/FLS restrictions or exclude the affected names from the request. | `Datasets with document or field level security restrictions are not supported` |
```

---
navigation_title: "Query datasets"
description: "Query external data with ES|QL Data Federation. Learn how the engine reduces storage reads, combine datasets with indices, and troubleshoot common issues."
applies_to:
  stack: preview =9.5
  serverless: preview
products:
  - id: elasticsearch
---

# Query external datasets with {{esql}} Data Federation

> A dataset is a read source for the standard {{esql}} pipeline. You query it with `FROM` like an index, and every processing command works the same way it does for an index. For a worked example, refer to [get started with {{esql}} Data Federation](esql-data-federation-quickstart.md).

Reviewer 3: why don't you drop the world's simplest example of a from in here, just so people looking for something to copy stumble on it with their peepers

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/leemthompo/elasticsearch/commit/add22a0ca13ab3052de334a399d1d83de459d4ee
